In the lecture we created a slider shortcode but then we had this weird problem where WordPress added
some empty P tags here inside the slider. And therefore Slick Slider converted these P tags into
slides.
So we're having some empty slides here and then our images, right?
So first I just discovered a problem with our gulpfile.
So if we go to slider.js or  button.scss and save. I'm clicking save now, our scripts task will
not run.
And that's because in the gulpfile, in the gulpfile in the plugin not in the theme, we are watching
for changes only inside
the src/assets/scss
and so on. But now we scss files and JavaScript files inside the includes folder.
So let's just change this to an array and also watch for changes
inside includes. And any scss files inside of this folder or any of its subfolders. And same for the js.
And let's save and now if we stop this task and then rerun it again.
And let's try now and save slider.js. And now the "scripts" task ran.
Right?
So let's go back now to our main problem.
So let's remove the slick initialization here.
And let's refresh.
So now we've our shortcode, the "_theme_slider" and inside of it we have an empty P tag before and after each slide,
ok?
So to understand why this problem happens, we should first be aware that.
Let's go to content, the page content or any content actually.
And when we call the_content() function WordPress will not just get whatever inside of here and display it,
it will actually run some filters on it.
So let's go to the our
WordPress folder which contains the wp-includes folder.
And let's find the file called "default-filters".
And inside of this file we will find all the filters that our content passes through before appearing
in the frontend.
So let's doCmd+F and "the content".
So here we have "add_filter( 'the_content', 'wptexturize')".
So this filter for example will go through your content and convert some characters to symbols.
For example it will convert, if right write "TM" in a certain way it will convert it to the TM symbol,
the trademark symbol. And it also converts ' and " to smart quotes and stuff like
that.
We also have a filter called "convert_smilies" and this will go through content and find any " :) "
and convert it to a smiley face and so on.
So these kind of filters are not causing any problem for us.
We have some other filters that are responsible for adding the P tags.
So we have a filter called "wpautop".
And we have "shortcode_unautop" .
And we also, let's do Cmd+D, and we've filter called "do_shortcode" and it's run after "wp_autop"
as mentioned in this comment.
Right?
So why don't we go to the content and let's comment this.
And now in our page we shouldn't have any content now.
Oh sorry, this is the blank page template.
So let's go to page-templates
and this. Let's comment this. So now I don't have any content.
And what we'd like to do now, we would like to get the content without any filters. So we can use,
let's open PHP. And let's create a new variable and let's use the function get_the_content(). get_the_content() will get the
content.
But without any filters applied to it.
So let's echo this.
And let's create another page and let's close this.
And let's copy our slider and button. And let's create a new page.
And we just, we need to do some testing inside of this page.
Right?
So let's type "test". But let's go and edit it using the classic editor. And let's paste our shortcodes.
Let's view this page
now.
And let's use the blank template.
So now we have our content without any filters applied to.
Right?
So let's start applying these filters to the $c variable which contains the contents one by one. And see
what happens after each step.
And then this way we can debug why this problem happens, right?
We won't run all of these filters we will only run the ones that are causing the problems. So we have
wpautop.
So let's just echo a title here to know which one is which. So let's type "Initial"
and BR tag.
And also let's echo some BR tags after.
And now apply to the $c variable the wpautop() filter or function.
And let's also echo the output of this.
Let's "echo 'wpautop'".
And then echo the $c variable after the wpautop() is applied. And echo some BR tags for the next one.
So as you can see let's inspect.
So as you can see WordPress edits some
P tags after the wpautop() function.
So let's actually instead of echoing the $c directly let's "esc_html($c)" in order to see P tags on the
screen.
All right.
So what the wpautop() filter will do?
It will find each paragraph in your content and wrap it inside of P tags.
And also if we have an empty paragraph, so let's update it will add empty P tags.
So as you can see here the first line in all content is the button and now the button is wrapped in P tags.
And then we have an empty line.
So we have an empty P tags. And then we have the opening line for the slider,
this one wrapped in P tags. And each line here will be outputted wrapped in P tags.
All right?
So now I'm gonna add the other filters. I'm gonna paste them
instead of typing on screen. So we now, we next will have a shortcode_unautop().
And then the do_shortcode() filters.
So let's see now. The shortcode_unautop(), what this filter will do is that it will remove the P tags arround the shortcodes. And
WordPress adds this filter because when you're typing in the editor you only want to wrap text P tags.
You don't want to wrap shortcodes in P tags, right?
Otherwise your shortcode output will be wrapped in P tags. So if you output a DIV it will be a DIV wrapped
in P tags.
So to make sure P tag only wraps text WordPress will run the shortcode_unautop() filter and this
will remove the P tags from around shortcodes.
So in this step a problem happens.
So WordPress will see the "_themename_button" shortcode which is wrapped in P tags here and it will remove the
P tags and that's fine.
And then next we have the empty P tags for the empty line which are these ones and then we have our slider
shortcode which is this one, right?
It's a shortcode inside of it
some other shortcodes.
So when WordPress wrapped this shortcode in P tags, it wrapped
the opening tag in P tags as you can see here and it also wrapped the closing of the shortcode.
And it also wrapped every line inside of this shortcode.
So it wrapped every slide in P tags.
But when WordPress removes them, it will only find the top level shortcode which is the "_themename_slider".
So it'll find this and it will remove the P tags around it.
So it will only remove this one and this one.
So that's why as you can see here, we have this closing P tag that was supposed to be closing this
one.
But now this one is gone here.
And also we have the P tags around each slide.
WordPress did not remove these because the shortcode_unautop() will run only on the top level shortcode,
the slider, it will not run on the children.
And also we have the opening P tag here which was closed here, but now since WordPress removed
the P tags around this whole shortcode.
So it removed this one but it did not remove this one. So I'm not sure if this is sounding confusing
but I really recommend you do what I did and trace these filters. But anyways
the last filter we'll have is the do_shortcode().
And this will just convert your shortcodes into the HTML. So this will be converted to the opening tag for
the slider and each one of these will be converted to a slide DIV.
But then we will have a closing P tag here that is not opened.
So your browser will try to balance this and it will add an open P tag. And here also it will find the P tag
that is not closed, it will add a closing P tag.
And that's why you see two empty P tags before each slide.
So let's go back now and display the content.
And let's inspect.
And let's try to map what we're seeing here in the inspector with what we are seeing in this line.
Ok?
So we have the "_themename-slider" DIV which will be displayed using this shortcode.
And then we have this closing P tag and the browser will add opening P tag. And also for this one the
browser will find this
P tag, it will add a closing P tag for it. And then we will display the "_themename_slide" shortcode,
this one, with the image inside of it. And then the same problem,
closing P tag without an opening and an opening P tag without a closing.
This will add two empty P tags here.
And so on.
So how to tackle this problem? First let's do something that will remove the P tags around the shortcodes here,
around each "themename_slide".
And to do that we will do the same thing WordPress did. When WordPress wanted to remove P tags from around
shortcodes, from around the bottom. And the slider, the top level shortcodes, it ran shortcode_unautop().
So we'll do the same thing for the content of the slider.
So let's go to slider.php. And we have the content of the shortcode.
So this will be, let's get.
So this $content will be this, everything inside the "_themename_slider" shortcodecode.
So what we need to do we want to run the shortcode_unautop() function to remove the P tags around the
shortcodes,
right?
So "shortcode_unautop($content)" and let's see now. Let's refresh.
And maybe you don't see it,
but here we don't have a P tag before the "_themename_slide" any more.
So let's undo and and see it again.
So here before the DIV for the "_themename_slide" we had a P tag which is also closed
after the DIV. So probably here or something.
And now after the shortcode_unautop() function we won't have that, right?
So great, so let's see the slider now.
So it's looking much better now. But we're still having one P tag as a first slide and one P tag as a last
slide.
And that's because we removed the P tags around
wach shortcode,
but we still have this problem.
We still have a closing P tag here and an opening P tag here.
And so when the browser sees this it will open it here and close it here. And we will still have extra
P tags.
Right?
And also we still have an empty P tag here, after the button. Wwe added a new line,
so WordPress added an empty  P tag.
So maybe also we would like to remove these.
Maybe we would like to keep them but most probably we would like to remove them, because they would add extra
spacing and maybe you don't need that.
So if you search for this problem on google, you'll find a famous solution and the solution is to run
another filter for the content of all these filters that will find any empty P tags and replace them with
nothing.
So let's do that.
It's add a new filter.
Let's do it in index for the plugin.
So we need to add a filter for "the_content."
Sorry. And let's call it "__themename__pluginname__
"__themename__pluginname__clean_p_tags".
And we need to run this as late as possible.
We want to run it after all the other filters. So let's give it a priority of 20 and we'll also have one argument.
And let's create this function. And this filter will receive the $content and then we will modify and
return it.
So what do we want to do? We want to replace all the empty P tags with nothing. So "return"  and we can use preg_replace().
So we want a regular expression that will find all empty P tags.
And I found this on Google on Stack Ovewflow. I willput a link to it.
But I'm just gonna paste it here.
So this regular expression will find all P tags, empty P tags or a P tag with BR tag inside of it
or just a space inside of it or in other words any P tag with no actual content inside of it.
And we will have to replace it with nothing.
And then it takes the $content.
And let's see now.
So we've managed to remove the P tag after the button which was created by this space. But let's go to
the slider and we still have these P tags.
So why do we still have these is because what we've done is we're giving this content to the new filter
that we created. And preg_replace() will find P tags and replace them with nothing.
So it will find this one because this is an empty P tag but then it will go and find this closing P tag
with no opening. It will not match this regular expression.
Right?
So we still have the same problem where the browser will find a closing P tag and it will add an opening
for it.
And same also for the P tag here.
So let's actually log this in the content.
I'm also gonna paste this one. What we're doing after the shortcode, we we're running
preg_replace(). So let's save this.
And as you can see after preg_replace() this empty P tags is remove here, but this closing P tag is not removed.
Right?
So what do we have to do in order to remove these ones as well?
I found a function called force_balance_tags().
So I'm gonna paste something.
So before going to the preg_replace() we're gonna parse the content first through a function called
force_balance_tags(). And this function as it's name might suggest will find all unbalanced tags and it will
force them to be balanced.
So let's see what will be the output of this function.
So here it is.
So we have the closing P tag here.
And as you can see the force_balance_tag() function removed it because it has no opening.
And also we have the opening tag here and the force_balance_tag() function found an opening tag without
a closing.
So it added a closing tag for it.
And then when we pass through the preg_replace() this will be replaced with nothing as you can see here.
And this way we got rid of all the P tags in the final content.
So let's copy this function. And in index.php in our filter,
let's first run the contents through this function before the preg_replace(). And let's see the actual content
now. And as you can see you have the slider with only the slides.
So now let's initialize the slider again. And it's now working fine.
So that was a longer lecture but I think we've learned a lot in it.
And I think you now know a little bit more of how WordPress works behind the scenes.
Also this lecture is one of these lectures that might be a bit confusing for some of you.
So I think watching this lecture again might make things a bit more clear.
I think that's it for shortcodes now.
You now have all the basics and you can do whatever you want inside of short codes functions.
So let's move on to another topic in the next section.